thanks everyone welcome back i had to
take a little breather after um
you know just experiencing those those
really rich artworks i mean i kind of
felt like when i when we've been
installing the show i've been kind of
watching the progress and uh it's
hypnotizing watching the sculptures just
kind of move and i get really really
really sucked in so i really encourage
everyone to go check it out that was
what i was going to say that tiara's
work has this very particular i know
like hypnotizing
i don't know like atmosphere to it i
just can't i don't know like sometimes i
would just like keep on watching them
and then at some point just wondering if
i should move to the next one so it's
like oh yeah sure okay
there's some uh there's a lot of other
things to go through so i might as well
start moving slowly elsewhere so yeah i
think that that that is a yeah it's a
very powerful
very complete way of tying together
topics that are not only urgent but
necessarily to rethink and rebuild and
re weave
um
yeah which i think also connects with
what we're gonna
experience now
yes yes um you know and i'm definitely
gonna be going to bed tonight with the
thought of what does it feel like to be
a cyanobacteria
[Laughter]
so you know without further ado i know
we're running a little bit behind
schedule today we just have so much
richness for you um
coming up next i'm really excited to
present a talk by nathan shafer
nathan is a new media artist author and
special ed teacher from alaska he's one
of the founding members of the meme
rider media team which is an art
collective founded in 2000 designing
early form internet memes and
manifest.ar the first international art
collective making mobile augmented
reality works oh this is so great after
we just looked at some augmented reality
work
uh he was profiled by pbs digital
studios as part of an online
collaboration called the future in 2014
and he's been shown at noxious sector
projects bow weld bundle street arts
center rhizome the isea pratt museum
virtually switzerland switzerland out
north contemporary art house and the
institute of contemporary art boston he
also contributed chapters to the first
anthology of ar-based art making
augmented reality art published by
springer in 2014 followed by augmented
reality games to augmented reality and
education
and augmented reality in museums tourism
and heritage
his current work is called winter mute
and it's an augmented alaskan comic book
which he's received a creative capital
award for just last year um i won't see
too much more because i know nathan's
going to talk about it so i'll leave it
i'll leave it at that and you can
experience just in a few minutes
and i'm also you know being over the
moon to say that as a surprise we have
curator patrick lichty with us uh who
will be joining the conversation uh
afterwards he is a curator a
collaborator of mine in the past we're
currently working on a show together
actually um and he's a media reality
artist creator and theorist of over two
decades who explores how media and
mediation affect our perception of
reality he's best known for his work as
an artistic director of the virtual
reality performance art group's second
front iconic google a
and the animator of the activist group
the yes men
he's a cal arts herb albert fellow and
whitney bien
whitney biennial exhibitor as part of
the collective rt mark he's presented
and exhibited internationally and
numerous biennials and triennials um
there's so many i'm telling you google
him you'll you can't swing a dead cat
without hitting patrick lichty um and
he's a long time friend of nathan and
one of the collaborators of manifest.ar
as well
without further ado here's nathan and
we'll be back with you afterwards for a
brief conversation
to you navi
my name is nathan shaffer i'm a new
media artist special education teacher
and author from anchorage alaska
i'm participating in the worlding
protocol show
in the exhibition this is going to be a
talk
i'm giving also about collective
practice
and
world building inside of a collective
practice been working
since i was about 13 or 14
as as a kid with collective practices in
collective art making and world building
starting with the dogma one laboratories
that was 93 94 was in junior high
me and my friend isaac boatwright
started it up it was
honestly something closer to just some
art nerd kids that were really
interested
in
making art and we didn't really have
much of an education on what it was we
loved ulypian literature and fantasy
eclipse literature
uh we're really into data and surrealism
kind of normal
things that our kids would have gotten
into and we started
building collaborative stories
together by the time we were young
adults in our early 20s
with joel howell my wife we founded the
meme writer media team which
that was around 99 or 2000
there's
so that was the first i think we
probably wrote manifestos with the dogma
1 laboratories but it was honestly just
mostly kids having fun and i really
can't find a lot of that old stuff just
moved around so much but the meme writer
media team in 99
we were totally
mesmerized by this
book by richard dawkins
called the selfish gene where he
invented the term memes and memeplexes
and mimetics to to describe things
moving between culture the way genetics
do
uh so memes at the time were kind of
this culture jamming thing reality
hacking it was it was um
politically motivated anarchist
kind of art making disrupting the system
kind of stuff um we ended up doing lots
of really fun
things as we were as we were world
building we had all the political stuff
but it started getting
way more into science fiction and
fantasy elements the images i have here
this was a screenshot from one of the
old websites i think it was also off of
myspace and then one of the first actual
internet memes we
we weren't making internet memes so much
as we were doing interactive
art and installations
and things like that we had a group
inside of our collective called the
manifest infinity life extension
foundation
that built cryonic suspension devices
um
that one also had a manifesto so i mean
stuff like here you see um this is
called the brain freeze it's a chronic
neural suspension device that also made
ice cream
it was goofy things
eventually the meme rider media team
started we all started doing our own
practice
joel and i were about to finish grad
school
i was doing this project called novel
pieces
and
i was
really into this idea of
taking artwork
or finding artwork that existed only in
science fiction novels just as
descriptions and it didn't exist
anywhere else
and so for the displays it would just be
it would look like conceptual art where
viewers would just read these
descriptions and the artwork would kind
of exist in these liminal spaces between
everything
so this is
2007-ish when i was finishing up that
piece and that's when william gibson's
novel spook country came out
and
he started talking a lot about locative
media which is something some of us were
kind of doing i wasn't really calling
myself a new media artist at this time i
was calling myself a speculative media
artist because i was working with with
things that were right on the periphery
of
being let's say media
not necessarily digital but this one was
um
photoshop images
of artworks that were described inside
of spook country uploaded into google
maps so before the
iphones were really becoming a big big
thing it was still sort of new
and mobile augmented reality apps hadn't
launched
just yet they were about to uh one of
the pieces i made there was archie
which was one of the first augmented
reality projects i actually made with
christopher manzione who went to school
with us
and he had started something called the
virtual public art project
eventually since i was making this kind
of stuff
one of the or the founder of manifest ar
mark square asked me to join them
and
it was manifest errors this
international collective mobile
augmented reality artist that we're all
working together this was one of our
group shows called occupy mayday it was
all over the world all these little
spots were places where we had shows up
this was coming towards the end of
manifest are working together
in 2010
they wrote the manifest ar manifesto
and i
signed on to that it was kind of a fun
group to be doing stuff with we were
showing all over the world all sorts of
fun stuff
everybody was doing little festivals in
the areas where they lived
so uh unseen sculptures was in australia
and
christopher was doing the virtual public
art project in my neck of the woods in
anchorage i was doing winter mode
and i had really really started getting
into
building narratives augmented narratives
using ar i was working on a piece called
non-local it's just a bunch of science
fiction stories uploaded
into um
the layer app which is now defunct
there would be
sometimes little publications that went
with it
um
it ended up turning into lots of
different things
uh i started working a lot more with
these narratives
i built something for the anchorage
centennial where we had
a bunch of author four authors
write historical fit and fiction set in
anchorage
uh this one was written by angela yatlin
gonzalez a koi khan writer about denia
summerfish camp the denia or the
indigenous group in
south central alaska anchorage area
where i live
and so we use the augmented reality
laid over top of these illustrations
this is one of the first times i
actually work with comic books too but
um we use the ar to
you know do the videos and loading the
stuff
but one of the cool things we did was we
actually used the augmented reality to
translate
the denial language into english so a
lot of these words inside here would
translate
um i'm gonna run out of time if i talk
about everything so i'm gonna try to
get through this one of the the last
story in anchorage narratives was
written by edema labello one of my good
friends he's a yoruba playwright who had
gotten political asylum
in anchorage
so his story was set in 2015
it was about an asylee
in mountain view anchorage which is the
most ethnically diverse neighborhood in
the united states and it's this north
anchorage is kind of this fascinating
place and i i live in north anchorage i
teach in north anchorage i graduated
from high school in north anchorage just
this
really interesting place to to live and
work
um anyway edema's first story that he
wrote for anchorage narratives
was actually a yoruba man and a guachin
at the baskin mann meet in mountain view
and they realize they're both scientists
and they decide they want to bring
a bunch of megafauna from the
pleistocene arrow back to life and they
do that and there's an accident and they
both end up with superpowers they get
from these animals and
they don't know what to do so they
decide they're going to become
superheroes and fight crime and mountain
view
and this is the first draft of the story
edema wrote
in the humanities forum who was funding
the project
wanted an asylee story so we had to
rewrite it and um
do a whole
another set of things he did something a
little more autobiographical
and uh the illustrations i put with it
in the magazine
were all census data data visualization
stuff then we use the augments to
kind of go with
the the data visualizations
um
that story is important because it's
going to come back when we start making
comic books with the lucas
the the fish head soup comics group that
i'm working with but before we get there
inside the exhibition
going on in san francisco right now
is
three augments from the dirigibles of
denali project that i started with
patrick lichty in 2014
ended up bringing in a bunch of other
folks
12 13 14 more people on top of that but
the essence of dirigibles of denali
was there was three domed cities that
were literally proposed to be built in
alaska
shortly after alaska became a state so
all these americans and white people
were flooding into alaska
and they were planning a futuristic
world
in
in the state
the weather was kind of a hindrance so
they imagined living in these dumb
cities and traveling via dirigibles or
blimps around alaska
the three dome cities were arctic cities
seward's success
in denali city
arctic city wasn't located anywhere
specifically it was just sort of a style
created by architect fry otto
stewart's success was um
just supposed to be right north of
anchorage and denali city was actually
on the foothills
in denali national park
looking up at the mountain on the
tulkasitna river right next to the toca
city glacier
anyway i took all the specs for these
unbuilt cities and i built them in a 3d
environment and then uploaded them as
mobile augments where they were supposed
to be
built
and then
i hired a bunch of alaskan authors to
write science fiction set in those
cities
and that's what actually started
a way bigger world of
the world building
so uh there was seven or eight books
written for this project we just ended
up doing a museum show of it in homer so
we had all these books for say i think
we only printed five or six of them
uh
they range in in topic and style this
book right here dirigibles of denali
three dome cities
is a historical account
of
the cities this is arctic city
seward success
in denali city
in a history of dome city proposals in
alaska in the arctic or the circumpolar
north
why people would have built them
there's a lot of odd things
that come into play looking at this
um
one of the big things is that
well
to discuss the cities i i drew a binary
to to write this essay and so i looked
at transhumanism in literary punk there
or cyberpunk philosophy and kind of
looked at the differences between those
two and the idea of building a
futuristic world because those were
the thought processes when these cities
were built so
transhumanist philosophy saw all these
things as a way of moving into the into
a utopia of the future where everybody's
got
um
you know implants and living the perfect
kind of life
and then cyberpunk is much more
post-apocalyptic a little
a little darker
uh but a lot of the people say uh
william gibson or timothy leary or
buckminster fuller fm 2030 they all had
very different reasons for why they
wrote things and they all had uh
wildly
fascinating philosophies that didn't
necessarily line up
with
the the reality of the world we live in
anyway um so this was just one of the
books a lot of it
it's honestly it's an artist book it's
not meant to be
a big philosophical tome on anything
just sort of a history and then a look
at why we're building but what got super
fascinating was in dirigibles of denali
the 10 authors that built science
fiction stories in the cities and i just
as 10 alaskan authors i liked i didn't
tell them to write a story in a specific
city i just told them the ones we had so
denali city was designed by mike gravel
who was senator of alaska at the time it
was
a
drape city it wasn't or it had clear
teflon
drapes on it
uh
so this is what it would have looked
like on a river and if the the teflon
drapes would have actually made
something like a car port which would
have fixed the frost line
seward success was an indoor city with a
skyscraper just like a futuristic mall
almost and then arctic city was
definitely the dome city and it was
actually supposed to be a series of dumb
cities like daisy chain
but uh the 10 authors all picked their
own things and they started writing
these incredible stories
you know some of the authors were
indigenous some of them weren't we
created this facebook group to help
everybody
appropriately approach some of the
materials
and one of the things i really started
seeing was that a lot of alaskans didn't
see
the dome cities in this colonial
context like it wasn't necessarily white
people trying to live in the arctic it
was actually arctic people using dome
cities to preserve
a world gone mad from climate change so
there was so much time has passed since
those cities were proposed till now
that the reality of a domed city didn't
actually bring notions of colonialism
immediately what it did was it it
created
almost like an archive or a library
sense a lot of people thought about zoos
or or ways of preserving
the world
um finish that whole project off
a ton of really interesting fascinating
authors
were inside of this
and
i wrapped the project up we did the
museum show
and i had so many extra things and
everybody really loved working on the
project
i just started making comic book called
winner move which was the same name that
i had
for
the festival the augmented reality
festival
i'd put on when i was working with the
manifest ar group
so a couple things i had never made
comic books before i kind of like done
illustrations or whatever for augments
and i had never actually illustrated
something from beginning to end i didn't
really have say a drawing style
when
i think about drawing styles
i actually
spent a lot of time really kind of
fussing over it
and inside of alaskan libraries there's
a lot of indigenous story collections
that are all illustrated in a very
similar style george smart illustrated a
lot of them
uh jay leslie buffa illustrated a lot of
them in this sort of style
i didn't imitate it i just sort of saw
this as the
the alaska design style like if i i
thought about dc comics or image comics
or marvel comics
all of them kind of have a house style
that you could kind of recognize and i
thought of
these illustrations that you find in
alaska libraries is sort of the house
style
so that's when i started working on
on winter mood
proper in in these styles
um
i had published winter moon one and
winter moon two
they were getting
you know people seem to be really
interested in them the the response from
people was really great
um
but i had started doing something that i
had never done before
and that's
all the care almost all the characters
were indigenous
indigenous alaskans and when i was
putting them together i was realizing i
really wanted to spend a lot a lot of
time
getting
the representation of these cultures in
a science fiction cyberpunk comic book
setting
accurate or or not accurate well done i
wanted it to to feel
like it was like there was a lot of love
and care put into it so i tried all
these different things the in the first
character i really came up with which
was
like a nominal character from the
dirigibles of denali project
uh
this
superhero name cloudberry
um so i wrote the story ray venate for
dirigibles of denali head cloudberry is
one of the characters and then i go to
uh my buddy holly nordland who's an
inupiat
conceptual artist up here
and
you know inside all the friend groups
up here the artists that they get
together there's no secret on what
representation of alaska would look like
if it was done well
uh a lot of white folks were very or are
very hesitant to jump into it because it
it gets into a lot of cultural
appropriation or cultural property
issues it in you know well-meaning
artists
tend to not want to disrupt that so they
avoid it
which to my way of thinking avoiding it
is
similar to not doing it well
if i was going to do a comic book and it
had only white
characters and it was set in alaska it
would seem strange to me
so
i went to holly
and i gave her all the specs and the
stuff for cloudberry
and she just very honestly
so one of her things is she's an expert
in inuit female tattoos and
she gives them and she knows the history
and she's well versed in all this and
it's part of her practice so i asked her
what kind of tattoos
cloudberry woman would have and
so she actually just tells me quite
honestly like in an opiate
hero
wouldn't use the word clownberry she'd
call herself ogpec which is the inupiat
word
for it and
from there
i just started collaborating with her to
create this character
and
did did the whole story and from there
it was the same thing as working with
derek was a denali i i started working
with people to create the characters to
get a better representation of every one
of them so we would design the
characters together how do we implement
the language inside the stories how do
we implement cultural stuff inside the
stories how do we make a science fiction
story that's true to
um a lot of the ways of thinking or the
ways of telling stories and the the
structure of the stories became a big
thing too so it wasn't you know a lot of
alaskan stories are very short in format
they don't really lend to this
novelization thing that's so big in
american and european storytelling which
is when you look at it
writing a novel is like this really
auteur kind of thing where
one genius author
writes something
all by themselves and everybody enjoys
that singular thing and it's stretched
really long
when
a lot of other storytelling traditions
are much shorter in format they don't
have the beginning middle and end they
don't have the same
structure as they kind of end in ways
that you wouldn't expect or they just
kind of stop instead of ending or they
change
so the way i decided to go about telling
the stories
i started following a much more
non-linear thing
what became even cooler is uh one of the
authors from deirdre denali richard
perry came to me and said i want to
start uh a group and we're all going to
make comic books together
and i was like that sounds super cool
you know what are you thinking
uh so
we all started working on
this stuff together eventually we pulled
in
melissa shaganov and demi mujeres
casey silver oh we created like a nice
little group of people that are working
and
we started to push them together
chickaloonies is the one jimmy maher
sees otna at the baskin from
chickaloon he him and casey made this
incredible
graphic novel for children set in this
fantasy world chickaloon
richard actually took his story from
dirigibles of denali and we're turning
it into a comic book as we speak
story was
uh kind of a sasquatch yeti story set in
denali city
sort of a
post-apocalyptic story uh yetis or
sasquatcher called wildman or hairy men
in
alaska um winner move four is about to
come out
i'm over my time but i do want to show a
couple things so winter move three i did
with melissa shaganov who's actually
jimmy's cousin
also ought now from chickaloon
and
one of the super awesome things that we
did
is the main character arit
is danina otna and she's on the autism
spectrum so i had started blending in my
life as a special education teacher into
these comic books uh the group of kids i
was working with at the time
ended up creating
the villain in winter moot 3.
so we published that about a year ago
kova's kind of
taken its its toll on the practice but
winter move four is about to come out
this is uh some images from we're gonna
move four as they're coming out and um
i also started building these indexes
inside of the comic books that are are
work in a lot of augmented styles the
for scientific information is an index
of glaciers
index of space weather a lot of the
characters
in the stories have glacier powers or
space weather powers
one of the characters the main character
for winner move four is anthrone
who has
anthropogenic powers power to control
human or human nature or
man-made things
let's say
we had a few manifestos that came with
the winter moon
three had the first shared universe
manifesto that demi wrote inside of it
and four is going to have the fluka seis
the fish head soup comics
a little description by melissa on how
that works
so
those are my collective practices the
winter moot
are all available online or through the
banal street arts center space we also
have the
fish head soup comics
webpage chickaloonies can also be found
their
studio is called 80 studios
the first book in that series is
available too thank you very much
hey guys welcome back uh that was
awesome nathan oh my gosh what an
amazing history of work that you've gone
through um and patrick welcome as well
it's so great to have you here i failed
to mention because i did not realize
earlier that those publications that i
read in nathan's mouth earlier patrick
is also in those books too which is
super cool so i have so much i wanna i
wanna ask you about augmented reality
and um you know how this plays into into
everything um but first and foremost you
know um
you know something that
is really important you know for us a
grey area is the acknowledgement that we
are an unseated ramatish oloney
territory um and that's something that
you know for anyone indigenous folks
included it's hard to navigate um and
nathan you know you with real elegance
were able to collaborate with the
community in a really enriched in a
really rich way um and you know i think
that that's something that we need more
of is really understanding you know and
initiated kind of interaction between
between groups um you know it's there's
i think that you know you are able to
support the community and tell their
stories in ways that felt really
authentic and true to them and so i was
wondering if you could talk a little bit
about that collaboration and you know
how you were able to form those bridges
um that really informed how these
stories took shape
oh okay
uh
i don't take issue with any of the
things you said i agree with the things
you said
but
i did
that's just not the right way to say
it's just it's just uh friendships
so
in in friendships sometimes you initiate
doing something together and sometimes
they initiate doing something together
and
if you don't have a friendship where
either one can initiate you don't have a
friendship
and
the the way these collaborations came
about was it was literally just years of
kind of talking about some of the stuff
and
you know some of um
one of the people i talked with uh maya
selena gets a filmmaker out of fairbanks
and she was one of the people that
helped put molly of denali together
which is this incredible
kid show on pbs with uh uh
at the baskin
dene girl
and they just do so well by the people
by the culture by the languages by the
traditions just all these things i mean
they go so deep
with elder and community knowledge that
they get the sky color
in certain false settings in interior
alaska correct to match the village
accent of that person that comes from
this specific part of alaska why they
would have a slightly tweaked accent and
why they would listen to like a very
different kind of fiddle music it's just
it's so well crafted
and at that level with with um community
involvement
so but that's the long way of saying
there there was relationships set in
place that were friendships that weren't
friendships made for collaborations they
were just friendships so they naturally
were able to flower
certain things because you didn't have
to work on building that familiar trust
with it it was just literally going to
them and say like i
totally want to do this how would i do
this and
a reverse thing would be you know them
coming to me that way and a lot of it
they some of them might get mad at me
with with some of that it's just it's i
don't
i think allyship is important for a lot
of people and i don't
particularly care about that thing
that's that's that's um from my point of
view that's people
giving themselves brownie points for
something they should have been
doing a long time ago anyway
so it really comes back to for me what
we were talking about earlier today
which was leading with love and
connection and care you know that really
feels like a protocol and a way forward
that you know will be able you know that
will be able to sustain these kinds of
these kinds of really loving
relationships between between one
another
um
i wanna you know one thing that i don't
think you mentioned in the talk but
which is absolutely amazing is that not
only is this you know an output that is
a project that you output but it's also
something that you worked with the
community to get uh delivered to every
indigenous school in alaska um to give
kids access uh to these books and to the
ar experiences as well um and i just
think that's you know so fantastic
um you know a really amazing way to get
the word out about these things and to
you know create you know bridge digital
divides in lots of ways um i mean you
know um
because i i know that a lot of these
communities are are far flung with not
great bandwidth um you know
um and there's still a lot of
infrastructure work that needs to be
done to get everybody on the internet
that's the problem all around the world
um and so i'm wondering if you could
actually no i wanna i wanna i have a
different i have something else i wanna
ask you about um
you're about to get me super political
on this
no i was gonna ask you um
you know what
you know as someone who is working
really hard to provide access to these
kinds of things to all different kinds
of people i mean you can go and find
these comic books online you can you can
get the pdfs and you can experience them
at home anyone can anywhere um
and i was wondering you know what sorts
of
how should
artists and thinkers and me you know
different providers of media be thinking
about connection and be thinking about
providing access to these different
things and i know that patrick as well
that's something that's really important
and a lot of your work is making your
work accessible to all different kinds
of audiences i mean for instance with
your second front um
you know those were all free public
online performances that were really
driven by the community there in that
world
um so yeah i don't know i was thinking
that could be an interesting place to
start
uh
so for me before i answer for patrick um
there's still this little anarchist kid
who wants to make
artwork in me and part of that is
everything should be free everything
should be open
uh all the characters in winter mode
that i design are actually made we call
it alaskan open source
which means they're free for any child
in alaska to use however they want as
long as they follow
some very basic cultural competency
guidelines
because cultural competency is a big
part of having an open society
or a society where we share
with each other you need to learn
competency
on top of that when to stop talking
when when to be a good
listener doer ancestor all those things
um
but it it at the root of it for me
there's that little kid
that just wants to do something to make
sure everybody gets to have it for free
and i think i know it's uh i kept on
thinking about like
actually they
know the community is built through
peer-to-peer exchange
and how actually well that is not
necessarily just the metaphor of the
early internet it actually comes from
outside the screen and it must come from
outside this
screen pour inside the screen in order
for it to be reassembled and re-shared
elsewhere and i think that something is
very very powerful and it's something
that happens within this project apart
of course
of the narrative that it that it holds
inside that i think it's very very rich
and very powerful and that needs to i
know in a way be
re-brought into life
if it was not
living i don't know
i i think there is something that was
just like continuously living and
growing and then just
you know condensed into into this
project how's that i wish i had time to
show more uh demi maher so the uh oral
storytelling traditions in alaska are
just so
[Music]
long and beautiful and crazy
exciting but also a lot of people
outside of alaska just don't know it but
um
jimmy with his comic book
uh he just came up and we released the
first one but him and casey had a whole
storytelling performance that they did
with it where they had this um this gear
they gave and they gave up they're
called in on it's called yana dia the
the legendary stories
and um so i'm gonna start crying uh
demi's
maternal grandmother was katie wade she
was the yana diaz storyteller
of chickaloon village and she started
the yana diaz school in chickaloon and
demi's mother
patricia was a yana diaz storyteller and
one of the things she would always tell
him was
um the
cultures
it can archive and preserve stories but
thriving cultures make new stories and
she wrote a jana diaz story uh
for him and he turned that into a combo
he's got all these atna manga comics
he's made of jana diaz stories and he
created a new yana dia story called
fluke
that they performed where raven uh
steals
these uh fish eyeballs
uh from us
it's like it's this amazing story it was
the most incredible thing to watch but
this was going to what dorian was saying
because it was like this huge
crazy wonderful multimedia experience
and he was just doing it for fun to go
with the comic book when but it was
it was a performance that definitely
felt like contemporary performance art
in our high art world but it also went
back 30 000 years easy
in that space of time you saw him
touch back to the end
of the younger driest when people were
telling stories right there it was
just absolutely magical to see that and
then the coolest part of all that is
alaskan kids
when they're like watching us
do these things watching demi do that
they're like flipping through it they're
like sagani guy i know who raven is i
know who raven is or
uh i had a little girl at one of the
shows this yupit girl and it was uh the
og pick mars apple show
and she just kept running around the
gallery doing all the poses of the
superhero from the comic book and then
she came up to me and she was like all
tugging on my shirt and she's like
nobody's speaking yipton and these nice
big time which is the yupik language and
she's like you need to do book you've
done i was like yes i do
and i love you more than anything in
this world you are so incredible and
so that those little relationships is
what kind of stirred up
all the other things because it's just
it's super basic competent
storytelling is all it is it takes a
little bit longer the cultural
enrichment is completely worth it every
time so for every author or novelist or
whoever is making anything
what you're doing is trash until you
start working with other people to
culturally enrich what it is you're
doing and you're going to get to a point
within some of that where you realize
you need to stop being the one telling
the story
and you need to start initiating a
better conversation with yourself and
with the rest of the world and
i promise you even if you want to keep
writing novels and whatever
it will be better
the more you learn to listen more than
you talk
sorry i'm talking a lot so i'm being a
bad example no you know what the one
thing i i think that you really make a
great point of is it's like this this
this notion of friendships you know in
other words it's the matter of it's like
at one time
you know i i was doing work um you know
going up to uh adac island where my
where my father was uh living for a
while and then he came over to see there
was a project you did
um was it uh terminal glacier
exit glacier terminal project which was
an amazing amazing thing and it's like
you know how far did you have to put out
uh cellular uh you know repeaters like
about like two miles or something you
know to get people in there was it the
project was the fact that you know the
the exit glacier has been receding for
you know you know for hundreds of years
and you know and
and you know we had a thing where you'd
go out there and and look at this thing
and uh you know you could see where it
was at in 1776 and 2000 that sort of
thing it was it was it was actually
heart-wrenching and that sort of thing
and then you know but out in that time
you know we we spent time and
got to you know i got to know a few
people and then time out on adac you
know really fell in love with the uh you
know non-good culture and that sort of
thing and you know and you know
basically studied a lot of
you know going back to the storytelling
you know you know i went and studied you
know their um you know their their
stories and you know you know just the
richness of all that was uh really you
know really life-changing i think the
thing is is that
um you know this notion of reworlding i
think
um
would you agree that maybe
the idea of the pandemic changing the
social landscape of everything and
basically creating
new connections new strata and that sort
of thing and kind of breaking old ones
um
you know might be
might might have really made the world
much more um
um culturally fertile you know for
things like winter mood you know in
other words that you know there's like
broken apart old structures so the thing
is is that you know the the notion of
of this idea of that you know this
shared universe you know that that
winter mood is part of you know it was
made maybe more um
you know more feasible by um you know
just kind of the old social protocols uh
broken apart that actually bruce
sterling kind of said that broke it
destroyed uh science fiction you know
and turned it into speculative near
future
speculation all right so what you're
what you're saying kind of remind me so
i've worked with um this enuncian
i don't know what you call it like a
rock on tour he's like a yeah mobile
philosopher david carob we had a union
our friend
who was who was helping us
write uh this unknown story for winter
mode so this oh there i'm not using his
name because he he's he wants to stay uh
anonymous right now
um
but so we were meeting at this bookstore
and we were telling him you know this is
the character we have and he looked at
me he's like you know young
we never invented shoes so your hero
would have to be barefoot and i was like
knew it we got it right here we showed
him the picture he was like uh-huh
uh-huh and then he like leaned in and he
whispered
even if all the young people die
we will pick somebody and come to them
in their dreams and we will teach them
the songs
and it was kind of this um
like uh
the way he was saying i i can't get the
um
we were just we were meeting with him to
talk about how do we get the best ungen
superhero story out of all this so we
were going through all this stuff but
that was the biggest thing was uh the
the dream the united notion of dream
and and how that related to everything
but it was actually like culturally that
the dream was was much
but anyway that's what you made me think
of when when
the united people will never be gone is
what he's basically saying they're gonna
live wherever they came from forever
the the the the stories in the back that
he was given
the other thing that i i just kind of
want to uh
pull maybe pull out of your head is the
idea that you're talking about you know
you're the i think you you and i
identify with the the the anarchs or the
trickster and that sort of thing but the
and the one thing is is that the notion
between
um
i i don't know the you know the
anarchist and this is subversive and the
one thing is is the idea
of
you know that the yeah the notion the
notion of the subverse of having a
negative connotation i i think it's i
think that's absolutely false in other
words the idea is that someone you know
the subversive is someone who
you know who um you know
tickles the feet of the exists existing
order to maybe take the full rest kind
of idea of
of um
you know a better solution you know and
i think i think that's what you're doing
with with winter moon
radical sharing creates radical
collectiveness so yeah yeah very well
put yeah that's awesome i mean it's it's
it's all about you know it connects it
really connects back to again what we're
what we're talking about here like what
is the protocol how is it changing like
you know first step is really
understanding what the protocol is the
cultural protocol the political protocol
the the physical protocol i mean we're
all you know constricted by the protocol
of gravity for instance um and once we
can understand that and see those
borders then we can think about turning
it upside down you know and i think that
subversion is the next is the next step
um you know there are certain protocols
that just flat need to be overturned
that need to be eliminated and need to
be rewritten from the ground up
in ways that
take into consideration all of this
interconnectedness
and the values of love of connection of
friendship
these things which sound cliche and
sound sappy i think are so important for
the success and the survival of our
species um
you know what limit limitation breeds
innovation
that's a good one i think we're just
like hitting the rhymes tonight that's
great yeah we are we're riffing
so i think it's a better paradigm
loving kindness even if it sounds corny
to people
they could say that it's the same people
say safe spaces are corny and using the
correct pronouns or corny it's it's okay
that they think it's corny it's not it's
fine
don't get over it they they just need
some processing time
absolutely you know i mean you know what
i thought one thing that was kind of
cool is like you know out and not
manifest they are there was one piece
where we're putting stuff out all over
the world and it's like it was it uh i
think that there was like a big uh a you
know a big um
you know a big uh logo type of uh all
you need is love's you know just you
know you know
stuck out over the you know stuck out
over the ohio river or something like
that you know in other words it's just
you know but i mean the idea of you know
these uh
you know the of these imaginaries you
know that that these things put forth
you know that are able to take these
kind of unexpected uh yet unexpected
unexpected uh
pieces of joy and basically you know um
make them
you know give give give people surprises
in in
unexpected places that change their
lives i think
great so i mean that really brings me to
the next thing i wanted to talk to you
guys about which was manifest ar
which which you're both a part of
alongside folks like timiko theo
and
you know it's a really bold statement
that not bold i'd say because it's it's
quite reasonable and you know in in
everything but i just want to you know
give a couple read a couple lines from
the ar art manifesto um
you know if you if you go to manifest ar
dot art i dropped a link in the chat you
can read the full the full manifesto um
which which both of you are signing
members of
um and you know
reality creates coexistent spatial
realities in which anything is possible
anywhere that our future is without
boundaries between the real and the
virtual in the air future we become the
media freeing the virtual from a
stagnant screen we transform data into
physical
real-time space
and i think you know there's so much
more and this is such a beautiful
document
but one thing that
i
think about a lot with augmented reality
is
kind of the and this is this this is
it's kind of the perfect medium to talk
about in the context of worlding
protocol because
anything is possible with augmented
reality you can change the world any way
you want but it's only viewable through
a phone screen or via a projection or
via something that may be intangible um
and when you you know say you know and
if you if you you through augmented
reality change a city to be full and
fertile when it's really barren there's
still no fruit on the tree to eat and
i'm wondering how
you you know and that's really the whole
point of welding protocol everything's
possible but we have all these things in
the way that constrict and confine and
control um and so i don't know how do
you
how do you tussle with that tension or
that kind of back and forth between the
possible and the impossible you know
through augmented reality
so i could answer i could answer i've
got an answer already sorry patrick
no no no i'm
uh
so for me specifically i mean i didn't
own an iphone
until maybe three years after i was
making augmented reality art like
i i i
was very poor for a very long time but i
knew how to how to make 3d models in
code a little bit
uh i never actually saw my work it was
just kind of this thing that i knew how
to do
uh
that being said augmented reality was
more of a style so i really like
starting with something real
and then moving it into
another thing so like all my work
especially from that time but kind of
coming into now a little bit i would
start like with the real world thing and
then i would extrapolate a project from
it so the
dome cities that were proposed i went to
that and then i created a set of
fictions
from that
augmented out so the exit glacier
project exit glacier was shrinking i
went and created five of the termini um
at exit glacier it's just all
is it aesthetic style i just really like
starting with something like that a
factual thing um
winter move four starts with the
description of dog vomit plasmodia i i
really like that
the
winter mood 3 started with a description
of blood snow which is this
cyanobacteria that lives on glaciers
that is more pronounced when humans are
present and looks like blood
and it's kind of incredible and it
smells like watermelons and i like that
in
from there we start into a story about
uh superhero with autism i don't know i
did so the aesthetics of augmented
reality i really liked more than the
actual
thing i didn't really care so much about
the the philosophy of the hyper object
and virtual space and this and that
um it felt like just watching video art
from the 60s or 70s where like they're
on camera and they're like i'm on camera
i'm on camera and it's
i just the
[Music]
the ontology of it was kind of boring to
me
yeah i mean i mean for me i i think you
know i think what's interesting about
this is that
you know if you think about stirring's
idea of the death of science fiction you
know is that the um
and actually part of this is you know
why we started you know a lot of these
stories in the in the 22nd century was
because of bruce sterling's call for you
know uh for
22nd century science fiction because of
the fact that you had blade runner you
know was in 2019. you know so in order
you had all these you know science
fiction been collapsing into just
basically near future protocols you know
and so which is which i thought was
really fascinating and but on on the
other hand is that um
you know i like this idea of like a near
future proposition you know so
that's one thing i sort of like about ar
in other words the idea of sort of
saying
you know rather than saying that you
know there's no actual fruit on the tree
you know no actual fruit on the tree but
it's just sort of like saying but there
could be
you know in other words you know so this
this is this is this is this is where
you connect the dots in other words the
idea of it's almost like a proof of
concept in other words sort of like
saying guess what you know there's a
pair on the tree but there isn't one on
there now
you know
it's like but you know there could be
you know it's it's sort of like making
that proposition of saying
that that yeah that actually brings
brings that notion into
a potential realization
you know
name you give it power
yes
yeah i was thinking exactly exactly the
same
like how
the power of naming something makes it
come into life at least
in the
i don't know like the very essence of it
and and one way or the other once that
is
you know like inserted or shared with
someone else and in their head that
becomes something very very different
they're already constructing a new world
from that
their own new world from that and i
don't know i think that's something
that's very powerful and and i think
that comes a lot with the oral tradition
of sharing or also literature itself
where
in a way i i've always found that with
the
oral tradition
what happens is that no one imagines the
same thing as
someone else told you tells your story
so whatever you are weaving in your head
is your own world representation and
universe of this whole
no atmosphere story or whatever someone
else is sharing with you which happens
also with literature but once you start
sharing a little hint of how this could
look like or how this
this could work
it starts becoming something else
right because it's a way
a point of connection i suppose yeah the
the the gesture isn't empty it's an
invocation
you know absolutely i mean something
that you know last year's festival just
shout back to uh great area festival
2020 the title was radical simulation
and that was uh that was created by my
colleague and mentor kalani nicole at
transfer gallery and that's really what
their galleries program has been always
been about is this idea of radical
simulation and the whole festival um
pointed to this idea that
by imagining something it becomes a
possibility by giving something voice
and name and space make it something
that can be real and that can be
actualized um and you know that's also
goes back to you know what then mosey
was then maury was talking about earlier
this this this evening about you know
dreaming about dreaming being the
imperative and then chiari talking about
her proof of concept work where the
garments are imagined and the materials
made possible even if the garments
aren't actually realized and that's such
an important thing to
to do and to like root practice in um
simply by imagining something it becomes
something that could that could be
um and that is something you know and
you know why i asked my question first
of all about possible versus impossible
is because you know what i wanted to do
was take that idea of radical simulation
with worlding protocol and make it a
little bit more complicated like we can
do anything but we can't do everything
um and you know because there are there
are constrictions in place and i think
that you know there's a really you know
i don't have any of the answers here
there's a lot of tension in between what
we can and we can't do because
again it
we can imagine anything
um and that's been something that's
really profound and i think that you
know it really speaks to me a lot
especially through winter mood and
through the dirigibles of denali series
in that you know you we have these
cities these beautiful architectural
imaginings that could have been but just
weren't quite possible due to all
sorts of protocols that were you know
and and to me i think that was always
kind of the notion of the mul you know
the multiverse uh you know protocol that
was kind of baked into into that whole
thing there's the idea that
you know is that basically exploring all
possible pot you know all possible
combinations all possible possibilities
but the thing is that but still they're
all connected
you know and i think that was the thing
that was always really important
no they did a really cool job with these
by the way
yeah they
nikki crushed it
because i was
completely helpless i was too busy to do
anything it's just wonderful
nathan what do you what do you what do
you think of the idea of
of the
the met the metaphor of
not the metaverse but the multiverse and
the idea of that being a being
a connective gesture
the multiverse
yeah
the probabilities
i'm trying to think of an answer
hmm
i'm trying to pick the one i want to
talk about
uh yeah i like the idea of a multiverse
a lot of the stuff is is kind of
fun
i i've always
been collaboratively creating stories
with people in alaska
i become less and less interested in
some of the tropes in science fiction
because there's actually way better
equivalencies
for something similar
from
a completely
different point of view so i think a lot
of what
the the stories i'm coming up with for
winter mood
um
so one of them's cultural binaries tends
to be this thing that um that colonial
culture really really enjoys this notion
of good news
so for example um
it was a cold dark night
i am setting the scene for a story
that's involving evil
cold and dark in alaska
is winter
and it means nothing evil wrong it
doesn't imply anything
other than
it's wintertime
the the only weird kind of thing would
be say
a warm dark night that's a little
strange because it's not warm when it's
dark
but
the notion of evil does come into play
but it's not based on things that are
that are cold and dark
it is the the the notion in in south
central alaska is uh
the bear in winter
that is evil because it's something out
of place it's out of balance it's out of
sync if the bear shows up in the village
in the middle of winter that's a chaotic
thing it's an unpredictable thing
uh so the stories tend to not be
this this european notion of good and
evil and kings and queens and
it's just it's it there's that's one
of
hundreds thousands of storytelling ways
and for me the way multiverse or
apocalypse is or anything eschatological
um
especially if it involves cultural
binaries just tends to be a very
well-worn way of telling stories
i'm not that i'm making fun of them
but um
they're brought up inside of winter mood
as red herrings like they literally have
no purpose or meaning
um they're stable lamenta they're
they're they're things spiders make for
themselves
right and you know one thing one thing i
just want to say real quick is just a
matter of that i i don't want to suggest
that i'm saying anything like that i
think that you know just just the just
the conceit is the matter of just
hitting perspectives
yes you know that's all and i i think i
you know i i think you know much more in
agreement with you it's like this notion
of hitting perspectives
yes
but that being said the multi i love the
idea of a shared universe yes
a universe the world building together
that oh my god is the funnest i don't
like drawing comic books i cannot stand
illustrating i can't stand coloring i
kind of like writing a little bit it is
so much work and i have so much respect
for people that do it for a living and
make
less money than i do teaching but
they're doing what they love anyway i'm
off
asking the world building in a shared
universe yes oh my god that's the best
thing ever
creating all this stuff with other
people um when we have our 3k sauce
meetings and we all get together and
talk about i'm going to do this i'm
going to do this i was thinking
all these long
conversations with people
in our group in our little family about
how we're gonna build this huge fantasy
world or what are we doing
that is
the best part of all of it and i am
willing to sit down and draw comic books
to get to to to move through
that thing even though i at the end of
the day i feel like it's a waste of my
time to sit down and draw like some sort
of peasant
you know what when i sit down i i read i
you know i read i read the uh the comics
that sort of thing you know which i i
just actually do again and again
regularly is it it's like everybody is
their own every everybody is a universe
you know
everybody is the universe i think the
thing for me that strikes me about the
multiverse is you know this this is
related to a quote that dorian gave
earlier uh about you know i want to see
a world that has many worlds in it i
think you know kind of kind of thing and
the multiverse is
a really beautiful concept because
unlike the metaverse which is something
that is encompassing of all the
multiverse allows space for different
universes to co-exist and connect to
each other in ways that feel right to
them um and sometimes you know you know
connection is important but sometimes
separation is is important too and so i
think that structurally you know
architecturally it seems like a a great
model
um
we don't have a ton of time left but
there is um one thing that i there is
one thing i wanted to ask you both
because i know this is a theme that runs
through both of your work and your
interests the cyberpunk philosophies
that you mentioned nathan are something
that you know i've noticed really
pervade a lot of i mean myself included
i'm a huge gift i'm a huge gibsonite um
and so i was wondering if you could talk
a little bit more about some of those
philosophies and why
and or and how they resonate through
through your work
cyberpunk specifically
ah cyberpunk transhumanist you know it's
all of that kind of stuff man that's
another big long
super intense conversation
um
so winter mook comes from william gibson
from neuromancer was one of the ais was
winter moot m-u-t-e
uh if you if you're from alaska and
somebody says moot
it means people love it's a
suffix that means m-i-u-t and you see
that a lot so if i said winter moot
in alaska people think i'm saying the
people of winter
um
but
as a younger person i'll explain no it's
an ai it's m-u-t-e from from neuromancer
and so it was just kind of this funny
thing but m-o-o-t
is uh
in in the circumpolar north it means a
gathering so there's all these different
meanings on site on on top of the name
but it has a deep
reach to william gibson's
uh
sprawl trilogy but
cyberpunk for me the the big thing
i did no there's no big thing
literary punk is is is is kind of the
the stretch for me it's it's
i don't really care so much for the
cyberpunk post-apocalyptic
um
white guy that fights the corporations
with his technology kind of stories
those are fun
and and i do enjoy those but i have no
interest in writing those or
participating in those but there's
something inside of literary punk
that pulls out into a more all-inclusive
place and i've got to say you actually
switch my mind on the multiverse
so now i'm starting to think about that
in
in all sunshine and rainbows
cyberpunk's just kind of cool and i like
the aesthetic and one day i want to have
shark skin on my face and i want to have
super smart my wife just said no to the
shark skin on the face
it's going to happen
i'm going to be old at some point and
i'm going to want short skin on my face
all right
i'll take the gills you know that would
be great how awesome would gills be and
honestly it's that combination between
transhumanism and cyberpunk and there
was actually one of the transhumanist
philosophers
switched from transhumanism to cyberpunk
that was timothy larry and he switched
while he was in prison
uh he was in folsom county prison and he
wrote starseed
and he so he went from
um
he's kind of a fascinating person for
that
super weird and honestly transhumanism
is an extension of colonialism and
cyberpunk
is dark as it is
wants to fight colonialism and when you
go read
cyberpunk
literature
we didn't have they didn't have the
language back then he would have used
more of the inclusive language any of
them would have
if it had been
something that was just more part of the
consciousness um
the one i go back to rudy rucker is one
of my favorite novelists in um
no hold on
am i getting confused here
was it rudy rucker who was the one that
wrote ring world
well never newbin
nevin rudy rucker's awesome too by the
way wow hylozoic and um all those the
the
singularity
what was it called post singularity
those novels are great too
niven
he started off the ring world trilogy
and i was thinking about him because one
of the art or anyway the the
the ring world he started off with the
guys like having his birthday party and
he's traveling the world and there's
moving sidewalks and he got it backwards
and somebody pointed out that he would
have been going backwards in time so
niven just went in and they fixed
this the book to be accurate
so it was i the books are kind of trash
but like the fact that he went back and
fixed something when it was wrong
instead of just being like it's good
that's the thing that's dope about
cyberpunk
like oh i got the science wrong well we
need to go fix that
you know the the one the one thing that
i i was i've
my mind has kind of shifted a bit in in
regards to all this because of the
my time in the a you know asia minor
west asia and middle east and that sort
of thing is that is a couple things is
that i'm really kind of much more kind
like into stevenson and the baroque
trilogy you know it's sort of like these
you know this this this sort of like
radical rev
revisioning of of almost sort of like
almost like history punk you know almost
like swashbuckling history punk but the
thing is that going back to the
you know like the um you know stevenson
stevenson sterling gibson sort of thing
after living in
you know spending a lot of time in in
istanbul and living in in the united
arab emirates and that sort of thing i
could much more see
the sort of um you know the sort of
cyberpunk reality actually being
between baku
istanbul and dubai and maybe
uh
riyadh you know and then maybe going
down into you know north me nor north
africa and that sort of thing
you know
then beyond
um yeah then then china and east east
asia and that sort of thing because of
the thing is is that i i kind of really
after spending time in both areas i kind
of felt that east asia was too
to um
to uh um constrained by rules and you
know being in the middle middle east you
know is that well there are very
constrained rules but there are places
in which the rules are
very squidgy and you know that then and
there's all this high tech and there's
there's money and all these sorts of
things and i could see
you know like maybe an alko's you know
the the uh um you know industrial area
of of dubai you know that there might be
you know a skin shop you know somewhere
in one of those one of those things
where you know they're they're upgrading
the neural net and that sort of thing
and then you know and then going up that
sort of like i mean i totally now see
you know in you know west asia west
central asia and and the middle east
that sort of thing being a much more
fertile you know uh you know setting for
cyberpunk than than than east asia
that's so interesting patrick um you
guys were just running out of time um i
want to thank you both so so much for
being here this was amazing um and it's
so cool to hear you guys riff about
sci-fi together um i love all those
books too and you know science fiction
is just one of those things that
speaks to this idea of worlding so well
about imagining different possibilities
not only imagining possibilities but
also showing us possibilities that we
need to avoid um you know and i think
that we see that you know i'm thinking
of the neuromancer trilogy specifically
where we see the rise of the
megacorporation and the control and the
issues that that that causes and that
feels so prescient right now um
especially in this moment um
in time but you know what i think i
think science fiction is dead i think
it's all near future speculation so
let's let's dream about the stuff we
want to have
yeah yeah
that's a good that's a great way to
that's a great way to close out um
before we go nate and patrick do you
want to just let us know about any other
projects that you have coming up uh that
folks can check out
window four is about to drop we're about
to have our first trade paperback so
that's issues one and two winner modes
gonna be out before the end of the year
uh our fish head soup comics we got all
the
stuff up there i would totally go pick
up a copy of chickaloonies that's very
new it's super awesome
mostly book stuff
awesome
yeah a lot of mines a lot of mine's
curatorial stuff uh i'm on the board of
the wrong biennial and there's a whole
bunch of stuff going on it's that my
partner uh
naginet tasabi and and i are
with our gallery is doing a piece called
we don't fall which is featuring
uh 30 uh iranian designers and artists
and with in collaboration with uh winona
state university uh in on the lands of
the great sioux nation where i'm at here
in winnipeg in winona minnesota and then
lastly um and then i'm also uh we're
part of a pro a project called
texpressionism um which is going to have
its uh annual coming up opening up with
the wrong biannual as well at
techspecialism.com
amazing and as one final shout out i'll
say that patrick and i are working on a
show at neem in cyprus
um and that's how we met really um
that's gonna be coming out in december
so keep your eye on
that space i wanted i wanted you to say
that
awesome
well you know what guys that is a wrap
for day two of gray area festival thank
you so much for being here doreen it was
so fun to share this space with you i
appreciate your voice so much patrick
and nathan thank you so much for being
here um we're gonna kick off tomorrow
morning i i think it's at 10 am i got